In our everyday lives,
we frequently follow rules
for solving problems.
As a simple example,
imagine you want
a cup of coffee.
If you've made
coffee many times,
then you likely follow
a process to make it.
First, you grab
your favorite mug.
Then, you put water into
the coffee maker and add
your coffee grounds.
You press the start button
and wait a few minutes.
Finally, you enjoy your
fresh cup of coffee.
Even if you have a
different approach to
making coffee or don't
drink coffee at all,
you will likely
follow a set of rules
for completing similar
everyday tasks.
When you complete
these routine tasks,
you're following an algorithm.
An algorithm is a set of
rules that solve a problem.
In more detail, an
algorithm is a set
of steps that takes an
input from a problem,
uses this input
to perform tasks,
and returns a solution
as an output.
Let's explore how algorithms
can be used to solve
problems in Python.
Imagine that you, as
a security analyst,
have a list of IP addresses.
You want to extract
the first three digits
of each IP address,
which will tell you
information about
the networks that these
IP addresses belong to.
To do this, we're going to
write an algorithm that
involves multiple
Python concepts
that we've covered so far:
loops, lists, and strings.
Here's a list with IP addresses
that are stored as strings.
For privacy reasons,
in our example,
we're not showing the
full IP addresses.
Our goal is to extract
the first three numbers
of each address and store
them in a new list.
Before we write any Python code,
let's break down an approach to
solving this problem
with an algorithm.
What if you had one IP address
instead of an entire list?
Well, then the problem
becomes much simpler.
The first step in solving
the problem will
be to use string
slicing to extract the
first three digits
from one IP address.
Now let's consider how to
apply these to an entire list.
As the second step,
we'll use a loop to apply
that solution to every
IP address on the list.
Previously, you learned
about string slicing,
so let's write some Python code
to solve the problem
for one IP address.
Here we're starting
with one IP address
that begins with 198.567.
And we'll write a few
lines of code to
extract the first
three characters.
We'll use the bracket
notation to slice the string.
Inside the print statement,
we have the address variable,
which contains the IP
address we want to slice.
Remember that Python
starts counting at 0.
To get the first
three characters,
we start our slice at index 0
and then continue all
the way until index 3.
Remember, that Python
excludes the final index.
In other words, Python
will return the
characters at index 0,
1, and 2.
Now, let's run this.
We get the first three
digits of the address: 198.
Now that we're able to solve
this problem for one IP address,
we can put this code
into a loop and
apply it to all IP addresses
in the original list.
Before we do this,
let's introduce one more
method that we'll be using
in this code: the append method.
The append method adds
input to the end of a list.
For example, let's say
that my list contains 1,
2, and 3.
With this code, we can use
the append method to
add 4 to this list.
First, we are given the IP list.
Now, we're ready to extract
the first three characters from
each element in this list.
Let's create an
empty list to store
the first three characters
of each IP from the list.
Now we can start the for loop.
Let's break this down.
The word "for" tells Python
that we're about to
start a for loop.
We then choose address
as the variable inside
of the for loop,
and we specify the list
called IP as the iterable.
As the loop runs,
each element from
the IP list will be
stored temporarily in
the address variable.
Inside the for loop,
we have a line of code to add
the slice from address
to the networks list.
Breaking this down, we
use the code we wrote
earlier to get the
first three characters
of an IP address.
We'll use our append method
to add an item to
the end of a list.
In this case, we're adding
to the networks list.
Finally, let's print the
networks list and run the code.
The variable networks
now contains a list of
the first three digits of
each IP address in the
original list: IP.
That was a lot of information.
Designing algorithms
can be challenging.
It's a good idea to
break them down into
smaller problems before jumping
into writing your code.
We'll continue to
practice this idea in
the upcoming videos.
Meet you there.